# Yalieats - A CS50 Final Project

**PROJECT CREATOR:** Marcus Lisman, Yale College '25, Pierson College

**PROJECT VIDEO URL:** https://youtu.be/b4ECEQ77kFY


## PROJECT DESCRIPTION
Yalieats is a web application that allows its users to search for and review local restaurants in the New Haven, Connecticut area. When running the application, the user is prompted to either register or log in. They then have access to the different tools within Yalieats. Members have three options: Search by Restaurant Name, Search by Filters, or Review a Restaurant. Each of these features will be explained in more detail further down in the file. Users can access reviews, get recommendations based on filters they choose, and see the different ratings that Yalies leave to find out the perfect place to eat. Essentially, finding the right restaurant to eat at becomes a much easier task with Yalieats.


## HOW TO RUN THE APPLICATION:
Yalieats is a Flask application that was built, tested, and run entirely in the CS50 VSCode IDE (the browser version, not the desktop version) that has been utilized during the semester as the key virtual codespace for Yale's CS50 course. All the accompanying files are included in the finalproject folder, which includes a flask_session folder, a static folder that contains images, favicons, fonts, and styles.css found in the application, a templates folder that contains all of the html files, the app.py file, the DESIGN.md and README.md files, a helpers.py file, a requirements.txt file, and the yalieats.db database (SQLite3), which includes a table for the members, a table for the restaurants, and a table for the reviews.

In order to run the application, first you should download the finalproject folder (unzip the file beforehand, if necessary) and drag it into the VSCode IDE file explorer so you can import the project.

Next, in the terminal, type the following command and hit enter: cd finalproject

This step will put you into the finalproject folder (finalproject/ $)
Next, in the terminal (after the finalproject/ $), type the following command and hit enter: flask run

That command will open a new port to the application and reveal a link that you can go to in order to access the website. Hover over the link with your mouse and hit "Command + Click" in order to open the link. The application should now run and you will be on the before_main.html page with two options: REGISTER or LOG IN.

What to do from here will be detailed in the next section of the file, which will describe the different pages, functionalities, and features of the Yalieats web application

## PAGES, FUNCTIONALITIES, AND MAIN FEATURES OF YALIEATS

1. Register and Login Initial Page (before_main.html)

When the user initially launches the application, they are taken to a "before" main page, which is basically the only page a user can access before either registering or logging in. If the user wants to register, they click the register button, which takes them to a form that has some fields for information. All of the fields must be filled or else when the submit button is clicked, the user will be shown an html page which describes their error and then has a button to take them back to the registration page. The user is asked for their first name, last name, email address, username, password, and confirmation (retype the same password to confirm they match up). If all the fields are filled and the passwords match, the user is then redirected to the page where they can choose to either register or log in. In the background, the form is submitted and the information is added to the members table of the yalieats database. Next, the user can log in by putting in their username and password. If either of these are incorrect, the user will get an html page with their error and can click the button on screen to return to the login page. After logging in successfully, the user will then be taken to the main.html page, which has the added white navigation bar and the three blue options titled "Search for a Restaurant", "Search by Filters", and "Review a Restaurant".

2. Main Homepage after logging in (main.html and corresponding pages tied to the features discussed below)

After logging in, the user will be viewing a slighly different interface. As mentioned previously, there is now a navigation bar and three buttons with the options titled "Search for a Restaurant", "Search by Filters", and "Review a Restaurant". In the navigation bar, there are four clickable options: "About Us", "Your Account", "Contact Us", and "Log Out"

The About Us button in the navigation bar takes the user to a simple page that displays some text with the story and inspiration for Yalieats. The Your Account button takes the user to a page that displays their review history. When the user enters a review, their member id is attached to the review they submit, and then the program pulls their reviews and displays it in a reviews table (contains the different review values such as ID, price rating (Price), portion rating(Size), deliciousness rating (Delicious), recommendation (Y/N), and comments made (Comments)). At the top of the page, there is also a small search form that takes in an ID number (1-212 currently, as that is the number of restaurants in the database) and then ties that ID to the restaurant name so the user can match the review to the restaurant without having the clutter of the restaurant name being listed with every entry. They can see those name results on a case by case scenario if they want a reminder of what restaurant they reviewed. The Contact Us Page contains an embedded Google Form where the user can submit feedback from their Yale email accounts that will be directed towards the Google Forms page I made within the Yale GSuite so I can make changes and integrate suggestions in the future on a case-by-case basis based on user feedback. The Log Out button clears the session and logs the user out. The user then returns to the before_main.html page and can either log in or register at the very beginning of the application.

Next the functionalities of the three main features (correspond to the three central buttons on the main homepage) will be explained (Search for a Restaurant, Search by Filters, and Review a Restaurant)

a) Search for a Restaurant: After clicking the Search for a Restaurant button, the user will be taken to a page tht has a blank dropdown menu. The Search for a Restaurant allows the user to choose a restaurant from that menu and once they make their choice, they gain access to information about the restaurant, including name, address, phone number, type of food served at the restaurant, if the restaurant is on the Snackpass application, and the overall vibe of the restaurant. The user also has the option to click the Get Directions button to get redirected to Google Maps for directions with the address already inputted or can click the Call Restaurant Button to directly call the restaurant. If the user submits the form as blank, they will get redirected to an HTML error messsage page and then can return to the search page using the button below the message. The user can also click the Get Reviews button, which will take them to a page with another dropdown menu. They select the restaurant they want reviews from using the dropdown menu (can be the same restaurant or something else, it doesn't matter), submit the form, and they will get one of two options: the review information or a message saying that there are no reviews yet for the restaurant. In the review information, the user will see the restaurant name, the overall rating, the portion size rating, the price rating, the deliciousness rating, and the Bang for Buck rating, which is a weighted average of the portion, price, and deliciousness ratings to give users a metric of how much bang they're getting for their buck, which is important for college students. These numbers that are displayed if there are reviews are based on real reviews that Yale students have left and are updated in real time as users submit more and more reviews.

b) Search by Filters: After clicking the Search by Filters Restaurant button, the user will be taken to a page that has three dropdown menu options that correspond to three filter options: Food Type, On Snackpass?, and Restaurant Vibe. The user will select an option from all three dropdown menus in order to get the best possible result, but that isn't necessary. The user must modify all three fields for their query or the system will submit the default values into the form. Once the form is submitted, the user is then taken to a page that has a list of all the restaurants that match the search filter criteria as well as information about them that mirrors that of the Search for a Restaurant search result or is potentiall shown an error message if their query doesn't have any results. The user can then scroll through and get information about the places that match what they want to eat and if they want to access the reviews for a certain restaurant on the list, they can click the See Reviews button, select the corresponding restaurant name on the dropdown menu from the page they get redirected to, and then see the reviews (if there are reviews). If the user leaves all of the spaces blank, then the user will get redirected to an error page with a message saying that none of the restaurants meet the criteria, so at least 1 of the 3 questions in the filter form must be answered to get a list of results back.

c) Review a Restaurant: After clicking the Review a Restaurant button, the user will be taken to a page with a form that allows them to leave a review. The user will be asked for a Restaurant Name that they can select from a dropdown menu like the one they use when searching for a restaurant. They will then enter a value for price (1 being very high prices, 10 being very low prices), portion size (1 being very small portions, 10 being very large portions), a yes or no from a dropdown menu for their recommendation to other people, a value for overall experience and overall deliciousness (1 being bad experience and a lack of deliciousness, 10 being a brilliant experience and a surplus of deliciousness, respectively), and then some comments at the end. For this form, all of the fields must be filled out and match the parameters listed in the form fields. For example, if the user tries to enter a value less than 1 or greater than 10 and they try to submit the form, they will be unsuccessful in their attempts and will get a small message above the field stating that the entered value must be between 1-10, inclusive. Also, if any of the fields are left blank, the user will get an html error page similar to those received when missing fields during registration and logging in. When the user submits the review, it gets entered into the yalieats database. After submitting a review, the user is taken back to the main page where they can choose to go to a different part of the application (Search by Restaurant Name, for example).

That's the premise of how to import, run, and use the different tools of Yalieats. Enjoy :)

It's a new way to eat!
